Lino Virgen
CS 5331

FOVE Eye Tracking Virtual Reality Headset Report

The FOVE headset is the first eye tracking virtual reality headset in the market.
It works by utlizing four infrared cameras which track the user's pupils and register
their movement. The device reads expressions, glances, and blinks to communicate
between the user and the virtual world.

FOVE is a startup company which started in Tokyo. The headset was announce in 2014.
In order to fund the project, a kickstarter campaing was started with an initial goal
of $250,000; this goal was reached after 3 days. Overall the campaign reaised a total
of $480,000. The company Samsung also contributed financially to the project.

This headset provides foveated rendering. This technique renders the image depending on
where the user is looking at. This means that the detailed rendering will be observed only
where the user is looking at and the rest of the image will have lower rendering. By utilizing
this technique the performance of the system is improved. It also allows for a more natural,
intuitive, and nearly subconscious user interface.

The headset is compatible with many SteamVR and OSVR titles and it supports Unity, Unreal, and
Xenko for VR developing. The headset has also been used to help physically disabled people, as
it is capable of simulating a mouse and keyboard.

Some weaknesses of this headset could be reading blinks for input. If the user does not have
complete control over his/her blinking the headset might read wrong inputs. FOVE is also a bit
expensive, being $599. It does not support hand controllers like other VR headsets in the market.
The game title that it supports are not many.

FOVE states that "by enabling fine control with the eye, FOVE significally reduces simulation
sickness through the elimination of unnecessary movement." Personally, I experience a high
level of motion sickness while using a standard VR headset so getting used to this device
might be difficult. Thus, my motion sickness rating is 6/10.

After FOVE was released Facebook, Apple and Google acquired eye tracking startups. Tobii had been
researching this technology for several years and now they are planning to release an eye tracking
modification for the HTC Vice. Pupil Labs offers VR and AR eye tracking headsets. The Chinese
company 7invensum came up with aGlass, an eye tracking adapter for the VIVE.

Other potential uses of FOVE are in health care, movies, education, social communication, and
further development.

To conclude, FOVE introduces a new type of headset that tracks the eye movement of the user to
communicate with the virtual environment while optimizing image rendering.
